Newcomers to the city of [[Waterdeep|Waterdeep]] are often confused by the importance that Waterdavians give to wards. In other cities, such as Baldur’s Gate and Neverwinter, districts are bounded by rivers or walls. But in [[Waterdeep|Waterdeep]], one can traverse from ward to ward by crossing a street — a fact that offers the drivers of hire-coaches some amusement when an ignorant tourist requests a ride to an adjacent ward.

Each ward has its own history, legends, and traditions based around who lived there in the past, famous or infamous events, and the uncanny things that continue to occur. For example, children (and even some adults) hop on one foot when crossing Asmagh’s Alley in the [[Castle Ward]]. Why? Well, Asmagh was an apothecary who poisoned many patients, then buried them upright beneath the alley under cover of night. He was discovered, and some say that as many as eighty bodies were subsequently pulled up from holes under the alley’s wide flagstones. Though this happened over a century ago, children passing through the alley still sing a song: “Hop for the hollows, hop for the dead, hop on the flagstones, hop on their heads.” As you stroll down Warrior’s Way or the Street of Silver, listen for the children’s delighted screams and go give it a try.

These shared stories and traditions impart to each ward a different culture, just as much as distinctions of class and wealth. Yet nothing drives residents to identify with their wards as much as festivals and sport. Nearly every race and parade in the city features a competition between wards as part of the festivities. On such days, homes and businesses fly the colors of their wards, trot out their mascots, and sing rousing songs that celebrate where they live. If you stay in the city for even a month, you’re sure to see some version of this display of civic spirit.

> **SPEAK LIKE A NATIVE**
> 
The many idioms and slang expressions of Waterdavians would take a whole book to explore, but here I explain a few that might otherwise mystify.
>
“Dabbler but no master” and “No mastery blazing forth” These idioms trace their origin to Ahghairon, who early on in his studies of magic humbly said, “I am no wizard. I am a dabbler but no master of magic; it seems no mastery burns within me.” Both now serve as expressions of false modesty applied to any skill or craft, not just magic use.
>
“Sharpjaws,” “fastfists,” “bullyblades,” and “alleyblades” Those who boast of martial skill but who shrink from violence or lack real ability are “sharpjaws.” In sharp contrast are [[Waterdeep]]’s “fastfists” (any lout easily provoked to violence), “bullyblades” (battle-hardened mercenaries hired as muscle), and “alleyblades” (muggers and thieves).
>
“Longride” and “Last ride” To a caravan merchant, a drover, or a farmer from the lands around [[Waterdeep]], as well as any Waterdavian who rides for sport, recreation, hunting, or falconry, the late afternoon is “longride,” and dusk is “last ride.”
>
“Which the greater thief?” Tuezaera Hallowhand was a famous “lone cat” thief of [[Waterdeep]] in the 1200s DR, who disappeared suddenly and is thought to have come to a violent end. She once robbed a wizard and wrote this on his wall with a fingertip dipped in his favorite red wine: “I take things. You take freedom with your spells. Which of us is the greater thief?” Waterdavians now use this phrase in argument with one another over all kinds of matters when comparing wrongs done.
>
“Doth thy mirror crack?” or “Hurl but think not?” or “Take but not count cost? Be nothing, then!” Laeral Silverhand, then the Lady Mage of [[Waterdeep]] when she was married to Khelben “Blackstaff” Arunsun, once publicly rebuked an overambitious wizard of the Watchful Order of Magists and Protectors thusly: “If I hurl spells but think not of consequences, I am nothing. If I take lives but count not the cost, I am nothing. If I steal in the night and see not the faces of the devastated come the next morning, I am nothing. If I make decrees like a ruler but undertake none of the other responsibilities of the throne, I am nothing. And if I do all these things in the name of the Watchful Order, I am less than nothing. Doth thy mirror crack?”
>
These scornful words are remembered and used almost daily in [[Waterdeep]] even a century later.