The first soldiers you see in service to the city will be the members of the City Guard who patrol the roads leading to [[Waterdeep|Waterdeep]], watch the walls, guard civic structures, and protect magisters. [[Waterdeep]]’s streets, however, are policed by an altogether different force: the City Watch. The similarity of their names often confuses newcomers, so I offer this handy mnemonic: “The Guard guards the walls while the Watch watches all.”

You can recognize any member of the City Watch by the uniform: a green-and-goldenrod doublet and a tall steel helmet. Each typically carries a long truncheon, a dagger, and a buckler. Because most citizens in [[Waterdeep]] don’t bear weapons, these tools prove a more than ample deterrent to criminal activity. Members of the Watch typically don’t carry crossbows or other weapons to attack at range, but running from the Watch — though it may be a time-honored tradition for local miscreants — rarely works out for newcomers to the city. I guarantee that all members of the Watch know the streets they patrol and that area’s residents better than you do, even if you stay in [[Waterdeep]] for ten seasons.

The City Watch has watch posts throughout the city. These stations are often off the main thoroughfares, tucked away in small courtyards or at cross streets. A watch post can be recognized by the green-and-gold lantern outside it, lit even during the day with a [continual flame](https://www.dndbeyond.com/spells/continual-flame) spell. A watch post serves as an organizational headquarters and armory. Anyone who wishes to report a crime may do so at a watch post in the event a Watch constable can’t be found elsewhere. A watch post typically contains a few holding cells where people arrested for crimes can be detained until they’re marched to a courthouse jail before standing trial.

Small squads head out from the watch posts on daily and nightly rounds of the city streets, or on special assignments involving protection or investigation. A mere pair of Watch operatives might discreetly patrol in the [[Castle Ward]]; in contrast, squads of eight walk the [[Dock Ward]], increasing to as many as a dozen at night. If Watch members spot trouble they can’t handle, they blow shrill tin whistles to summon more of their members — an act that alerts nearby citizens as well.

City Watch members follow a strict code of conduct that makes them one of the most trusted police forces aside from paladin-patrolled Elturgard. As long as you don’t engage in unlawful behavior, you can expect to be left untroubled by the Watch.